---
layout: post

title: "Coding Phase 2 Part 2"
tagline: "Forming the Brute Force"
categories: gsoc
author: "Ishan Srivastava"
permalink: /coding-2-2/
---

This phase involved a lot of coding and saying "fuck it" to all the problems
and just moving on to present some work.

### The problem of type3 settings **[<sup>[*]</sup>](#help)**

Ok so unsuccessfull on adding value checks to bear parameters by just using

type annotations <sup>[More Reference](https://www.dowhatucant.com/coding-2-1/#type_annotations)</sup>, I just maintained a yaml
file for now categorizing settings, adding settting names as key and their default values / acceptable
values as values to those keys.

### List of tasks accomplished:

* Added QuickstartBear
* Made a mechanism to launch bears with all possible combinations of settings to determine the perfectly green
  ones for now. 
* Created a multiprocessing environment for launching these bears in parallel.

Tried to preserve the generators by calling its `next()` function inside a multiprocessing environment
but encountered this error, 
```
TypeError: can't pickle generator objects
```
Ok so there were two wierd things about this error,
1. What the heck is pickling?
2. Why and where am I pickling generators?

On researching I found out `pickling` is converting any object in memory to a byte stream (think of
file read write operations). But the probelem was I wasn't doing anything like that over there. So
I resorted to StackOverflow for that and the answer came that I **was** actually pickling. This was
happenning implicitly because of multiprocessing and memory objects **are** converted to a byte stream due
to the inter-process communication, they are written to the memory and re-read again and again by each
of the spawned processes and this is one of the overhead of using multiprocessing.

Currently trying to develop a function which emits out generator values a little number at a time as I only
need to check for the emptyness of the generator for now. Later I might be using `ignore` to create `SourceRange` objects to actually ignore that part of the code or the entire file, and if there are a lot of
inconsistencies in a file, converting that entire generator to a list is an overhead that brute force can't
bear at the moment.


<sup><a name="help"></a>[*] Refer to my cEP over [here](https://github.com/coala/cEPs/blob/master/cEP-0022.md), for newbies to the blog, more about what is a cEP
over
[here](https://www.dowhatucant.com/the-bonding-phase/#so-how-am-i-gonna-do-it)
</sup>
